# compare_eDNA_in_ddPCR_and_qPCR
Comparison of eDNA levels in marine water samples from nonindeginous species using ddPCR and qPCR

1. With species specific monitoring of environmental DNA (eDNA) becoming more generally applied for detection of marine nonindeginous species, a need for being able to detect even the lowest traces of eDNA has become a next step to aim for in the development of species specific eDNA monitoring.
2. Here 17 species specific eDNA assays that targets DNA from marine nonindeginous species are compared on two different platforms: quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and digital droplet polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR).
3. New assays were developed and validated for monitoring Calinectes sapidus, Hemigrapsus sanguineis, Hemigrapsus takanoi, Homarus americanus and Paralithodes camtschaticus
4. The aim was to see how the species specific assays perform on the same dilution series of a positive control and on the same filtered and extracted water samples. Water samples collected in two season across a year from locations in Danish marine waters was checked for levels of eDNA from 17 marine nonindeginous species on both platforms. The levels of eDNA detected on the two platforms were comparable once corrected with a common factor for each assay. Equal high and low levels of eDNA was found in the extracted water samples on both qPCR and ddPCR. Samples that on the qPCR platform had faint occasional detections of eDNA from below the limit of detection, was not necessarily detected on the ddPCR platform, but samples analysed on the ddPCR platform gave rise to more rare and low detections, indicating that more rare and low levels of eDNA might be overlooked on the qPCR platform. Although ddPCR is more costly than qPCR setups, the higher prevalence of low detections found with ddPCR suggests this platform is superior to qPCR when it comes to early warning detections of low levels of eDNA from marine nonindeginous species.  
